docs: add VPA ADR (#3018)
kyma-project/telemetry-manager: docs/contributor/arch/032-vertical-pod-autoscaler-VPA-architecture.md

## Background

### VPA Architecture

VPA consists of three main components:

1. VPA Recommender: Analyzes metrics from the Metrics Server and generates resource recommendations stored in the VerticalPodAutoscaler CRD
2. VPA Updater: Evicts pods that need resource updates based on the recommendations
3. VPA Admission Controller: A mutating webhook that injects recommended resource values into pods during creation

For detailed VPA architecture, see [Kubernetes VPA Documentation](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/tree/master/vertical-pod-autoscaler).

### Current State

- Central OTLP Gateway DaemonSet has static resource configuration:
    - `requests.memory`: 32Mi
    - `limits.memory`: 2000Mi
    - Request-to-limit ratio: 62.5x (2000Mi / 32Mi)
- `GOMEMLIMIT` is set dynamically based on the memory limit (80% of limit)
- No automated resource scaling mechanism exists

## Important Considerations

### Request-to-Limit Ratio

The current request-to-limit ratio of 62.5 is problematic for VPA. VPA preserves the ratio when updating resources. For example:

> - If VPA recommends `requests.memory` = 64Mi

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

- Option B: Dynamically calculate `GOMEMLIMIT` based on VPA-recommended limits
- Recommendation: Use Option A for simplicity and predictability

## Considered Options

### Option 1: VPA Direct Pod Updates (Recommended)

Allow VPA Updater to directly manage pod resources through the VPA Admission Controller.

**Configuration:**
```yaml
apiVersion: autoscaling.k8s.io/v1
kind: VerticalPodAutoscaler
metadata:
  name: central-gateway-vpa
spec:
  targetRef:
    apiVersion: apps/v1
    kind: DaemonSet
    name: telemetry-otlp-gateway
  updatePolicy:
    updateMode: "InPlaceOrRecreate"  # VPA evicts and recreates pods as needed
  resourcePolicy:
    containerPolicies:
    - containerName: collector
      controlledResources: ["memory", "cpu"]
      controlledValues: RequestsAndLimits  # Only manage requests and limits
      minAllowed:
        memory: "128Mi"
        cpu: "50m"
      maxAllowed:
        memory: "1Gi"
        cpu: "1000m"
```

**Pros:**
- Stability: VPA considers Priority Class, Pod Disruption Budget, and eviction rate limits when updating pods
- Proven Solution: Complex decision logic (when to evict, which pods to evict) is handled by well-tested VPA components

> - No Reconciliation Loops: Pod resources are updated via mutating webhook; DaemonSet spec remains unchanged, preventing unnecessary reconciliations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- No Reconciliation Loops: Pod resources are updated with a mutating webhook; the DaemonSet spec remains unchanged, preventing unnecessary reconciliations
```

4. Trigger DaemonSet's built-in rolling update

**Pros:**
- Visibility: DaemonSet spec always reflects actual pod resources
- GOMEMLIMIT Sync: Can automatically update `GOMEMLIMIT` based on new memory limits
- Controlled Rollout: Uses DaemonSet's `maxUnavailable` setting for controlled updates

**Cons:**
- Complexity: Must implement update decision logic (when, how much, under what conditions)
- Maintenance Burden: Need to maintain and test custom update logic
- Potential Conflicts: Risk of reconciliation loops if not carefully designed
- Reinventing the Wheel: Duplicates functionality that VPA already provides

## Decision

We will go with Option 1: VPA Direct Pod Updates

Rationale:
1. Lower Complexity: Leverages tested VPA components rather than implementing custom logic
2. Better Stability: VPA's built-in safeguards (rate limiting, PDB awareness) reduce risk
3. Faster Implementation: Requires only VPA configuration, not code changes
4. Standard Solution: Aligns with Kubernetes best practices and community patterns
5. Acceptable Trade-offs: The visibility limitation is acceptable given monitoring tools can observe actual pod resources

Configuration Strategy:

> - Use `updateMode: "InPlaceOrRecreate"` for automatic pod updates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Use `updateMode: "InPlaceOrRecreate"` for automatic Pod updates
```

---
title: Vertical Pod Autoscaler (VPA) Architecture
status: Proposed
date: 2026-02-20
---

# Vertical Pod Autoscaler (VPA) Architecture

This document proposes integrating Vertical Pod Autoscaler (VPA) with the Central OTLP Gateway to automatically adjust pod resource requests and limits based on actual usage patterns. We evaluate two implementation approaches and recommend a strategy that ensures resource optimization while maintaining system stability.

## Context and Problem Statement

> The Central OTLP Gateway is deployed as a DaemonSet with statically configured resource requests and limits. As workload patterns vary across different nodes and over time, static resource allocation leads to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Central OTLP Gateway is deployed as a DaemonSet with statically configured resource requests and limits. Because workload patterns vary across different nodes and over time, static resource allocation leads to:
```

  resourcePolicy:
    containerPolicies:
    - containerName: collector
      controlledResources: ["memory", "cpu"]
      minAllowed:
        memory: "128Mi"
        cpu: "50m"
      maxAllowed:
        memory: "1Gi"
        cpu: "1000m"
```

The reconciler handles the following tasks:
1. Watch VerticalPodAutoscaler CRD status
2. Compare recommendations with current DaemonSet resources
3. Update DaemonSet spec when drift exceeds threshold (for example, more than 20%).
4. Update GOMEMLIMIT based on new memory limits
5. Trigger the DaemonSet's built-in rolling update.

**Pros:**
- Visibility: DaemonSet spec always reflects actual pod resources
- GOMEMLIMIT Sync: Can automatically update `GOMEMLIMIT` based on new memory limits
- Controlled Rollout: Uses DaemonSet's `maxUnavailable` setting for controlled updates

**Cons:**
- Complexity: Must implement update decision logic (when, how much, under what conditions)
- Maintenance Burden: Need to maintain and test custom update logic
- Potential Conflicts: Risk of reconciliation loops if not carefully designed
- Redundant Logic: Duplicates functionality that VPA already provides

## Decision

> We will go with Option 1: VPA Direct Pod Updates. VPA would be created by reconciler when the relevant DaemonSet is created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will go with Option 1: VPA Direct Pod Updates. The reconciler creates the VPA resource when it creates the relevant DaemonSet.
```

1. **Resource Availability**: VPA recommendations may exceed available node resources, causing pods to remain pending. This can be mitigated by using Cluster Autoscaler or configuring appropriate `maxAllowed` limits.
2. **HPA Incompatibility**: VPA cannot be used with Horizontal Pod Autoscaler (HPA) on the same resource metrics (CPU or memory). This is not a concern for DaemonSets, which don't support HPA.
3. **Admission Webhook Conflicts**: VPA's admission controller may conflict with other mutating admission webhooks depending on webhook configuration and ordering.
4. **Out-of-Memory Handling**: While VPA reacts to most OOM events, it cannot handle all out-of-memory scenarios and may not prevent all OOMKills. To scale Pods that are OOMed its important that pod should run for some time so that metrics can be collected.
5. **Multiple VPA Resources**: Configuring multiple VPA resources targeting the same pod results in undefined behavior. Ensure only one VPA resource targets the Central OTLP Gateway and Agent DaemonSet.
6. **Recommendations Without Controller**: VPA cannot update resources for standalone pods not managed by a controller (Deployment, DaemonSet, StatefulSet, etc.).

> ### Some VPA MaxAllowed Strategy

Reviewer: what does "some" mean here?

```suggestion
### VPA MaxAllowed Strategy
```
